# SAS-Course-Selection-Tool
This repository contains the files for an HTML website that allows users to input their planned high school courses at SAS, and checks whether it meets all graduation requirements, prerequisites, and other constraints.

Welcome to the SAS Course Selection Tool Code Repository page! In this file, you can find the rationale, usage instructions, code explanation, and next steps for this tool.
Here is a 'Table of Contents' of sorts for this ReadMe file:
 - Lines 11 to 16: Rationale
 - Lines 18 to 29: Usage Instructions
 - Lines 33 to 64: Code Explanation
 - Lines 66 to 70: Next Steps

Rationale (~300 words):
One aspect of our academic lives that all SAS HS students go through is planning our courses. This is no easy task. As outlined in the Program Planning Guide, students must meet very specific credit requirements in order to graduate. Alongside these requirements, lowerclassmen must take 7 credits and upperclassmen may take either 6 or 7. Students may not take more than 7 Advanced Placement (AP) credits. We also have Health, Catalyst, and US History requirements. Planning one’s high school courses with pen and paper is a terribly difficult ordeal, as one struggles to take into account all these specifications, erasing and reordering courses until the paper ends up as a scribbly mess of nothing. The solution is technology, to make this aspect of all students’ lives easier. And this is what I have created for the 24-25 CSHS Hackathon.

The website I developed uses an organised series of dropdown menus to allow the user to input their course choices for their four years of high school. Based on the credit inputs, the site can calculate how many credits the student will have attained for each academic area. With the press of a button, a user can see if their plan will allow them to meet the very detailed criteria outlined in the PPG to graduate, instead of having to laboriously count out the credits by hand. Next, the site can calculate the total number of AP credits that the student will have attained throughout their high school journey. Finally, for each course that the user inputs into the site, an algorithm will verify that they have completed the prerequisite courses in their prior HS years.

Instead of having to manually count through a convoluted Google Sheet or a physical piece of paper, with a press of a button, a student can see where they need to make changes for a successful academic plan. During a particularly stressful time for many students, this code lifts the pressure and makes their lives easier, helping the SAS community.

Usage Instructions:
You can access the website itself from this [link][https://keshavrawat-exe.github.io/SAS-Course-Selection-Tool/].

Here are some instructions for how to best make use of the features available on the website:
1. When choosing your courses, first choose the credit which it gives, and then choose the course within it.
2. Please note that some courses are listed under a certain academic area in the PPG, but actually give Elective credits. These courses will be found in the Elective credit section.
3. Grades 9 and 10 must have 7 credits, so be sure to input the details for all rows.
4. Grades 11 and 12 have the option of taking 6 credits. You can leave one row blank if you plan to take 6 credits.
5. After you're done inputting your course choices for each grade, you can press Save. This will allow you to reload and your course choices will be saved for that year.
6. Please remember to save all grades' course choices before you reload or leave the site.
7. When you have all the courses you need, press the calculate button at the bottom.
8. Then, look at the Things to Change section to find any revisions you need to make to your plan.
   
These instructions are also written at the top of the site itself so that users can quickly reference them if they have any doubts during the process.

Code Explanation:
In this section of the documentation, I'll go through each key source file (HTML, CSS, JS) and explain the utility, function, and logic behind their key components, elements, and functions. I recognise that these files all contain code that impacts the structure, style, and function of the site (respectively), and so I will discuss the most relevant topics when covering each section. For easier organisation and reference, here is a 'Table of Contents' of sorts for the Code Explanation section specifically:
 - Lines 39 to 44: HTML (index.html)
 - Lines 46 to 53: CSS (style.css)
 - Lines 55 to 64: JavaScript (script.js)

1. HTML
   The code written in this HTML file creates the shell or skeleton for the websites, setting up all the elements in their base forms, identifying them, and organising them. The file starts with the head of the website, containing meta information. While most websites would contain meta-tags and descriptions, because this website is specific to the SAS community, I believe that there is minimal need to have it pop up first on a search engine for all users of the Internet.
   Moving onto the body of the website. I start with a banner header, and then move onto instructions. To denote major sections of the website, I use Heading 2s. After the instructions paragraph is over, I move onto the actual course input sections.
   These sections look like tables with four columns, two donating the academic area of a desired course (for Sem. 1 and Sem. 2), and two donating the actual course itself. As I mentioned in the instructions, to select a course, a user has to select the academic area (credit) of the course, and then select their desired course from within that academic area. I chose to separate the Sem. 1 and Sem. 2 choices with their credits because of the prevalence of semester courses in SAS, and also the fact that most people tend to take semester courses from multiple academic areas during the same semester. This allows me to have the maximum amount of flexibility with the course choices, and allows me to account for all possible course reshufflings. About the actual body of the table, I had it initialised dynamically using JavaScript, and so the skeleton of the table is created in that file. I will cover everything about the cells and course selects in the JS code explanation section.
   After the input tables for each grade, I have both a save button and a clear button. I'll get into the details about how the save and clear buttons work in the JS code explanation section. I chose to have separate save and clear buttons for each grade, so that there would be no risk of a user accidentally pressing a clear button and deleting ALL their choices. Choosing to save specific grades separately can also save memory in localStorage, by only saving the elements from a specific grade, and so not wasting any storage on empty cells for the other course choices from other grades. The tables and their respective save and clear buttons are repeated four times, once for each grade, with every table having 7 rows and both buttons.
   Finally, after inputting all the details, to give the user their results, I have the results heading. Under this Heading 2, there are three Heading 3s. The first is a Credit Summary, which will show a tally of all the credits attained per academic area. This is raw data, so I process it under the next Heading 3: things to change. Here, if graduation requirements are not met, a specific message will pop up in this section to instruct the user on necessary changes. Users will also be alerted to any non-conformity to other specifications like the Health, Catalyst, and US History requirements, as well as the 7.0 AP cap.

2. CSS
   The code written in the CSS file styles the website body elements set up in the HTML file. Styling is very important in website design, as an appealing aesthetic can really impact the user's perception of a website's utility, as well as their content with using the software in the first place. Going through how I styled every single element would be exhausting for me to write, and for you to read, so here are some key principles that I followed:
   - consistent fonts throughout the piece: I consistently and explicitly set the font-family value for all elements to Times New Roman, for a chic yet consistent look
   - soft colours: While brilliant colours do look stunning in artwork, they hurt the eyes when acting as the background for small black text
   - background bubbles for important sections: for each Heading 3 under the Results tab, I made sure to put them in their own coloured bubbles to highlight each one independently
   - element colour value choice: I chose green for the save buttons (we like saving guys), red for the clear buttons (no don't delete stuff), yellow for the results text (alerts mostly use yellow)
   - button details: I made sure that when hovering over a button, our cursor becomes a pointer, and the button gets highlighted slightly, for more clear and responsive UI
   - appropriate margins: I didn't want all our elements to be squeezed together, so I gave each element the space it needed to shine (aesthetically of course)

3. JavaScript
   This file contains the majority of the code for the function for the inputs and results page, as well as all the logic behind the calculations and other UI details. Let's go in chronological order. I'll provide the line numbers for what element / function I'm talking about, so you can cross-reference (if needed) with the code itself.
   1. Lines 1 - 385: These lines contain the information for: each course available at SAS, the prerequisites for each of those courses, and the graduation requirements for each academic area. While I could have put all the elements of these lists on one line, spreading them out (one per line) makes the code much more readable (but also much more LONG).
   2. Lines 388 - 483: This is the populate table function, which dynamically initialises the dropdown menus for all 4 of the course input tables. For each and every dropdown menu, the function assigns them a unique ID for their easy identification and storage, as well as a class so that they can be styled in CSS (found in the CSS file). I also added a match button element to the Sem. 2 credit choices so that users wouldn't have to input their choices for Sem. 2 repeatedly (for year-long courses). The function ends with setting up event listeners so that the dropdown menus can always be updated to show the correct course choices, and loading any data saved to localStorage into the tables.
   3. Lines 485 - 494: This function, updateCourses, is key to the function of the course input tables. I didn't want to overload any user by making them select their courses from a select holding over 180 courses. Instead, I narrowed it down to the 25 or so per academic area. This means that, for every course dropdown menu, the choices within that menu would have to be updated to be specifically those that fell within the academic area selected in the column to the left. This function maps those courses to the course dropdown menus.
   4. Lines 496 - 530: This section of the code contains the two functions that deal with saving the input data to localStorage. First of all, I chose to save data to localStorage only, instead of some kind of server, because I wanted students' course selection data to stay private, and localised to the confines of his or her computer. localStorage stores data in key: value pairs, and because of the unique ID identification system for each dropdown menu, I was able to store all the data for the chosen information in localStorage, ready to be accessed and loaded the next time a user wants to look at their High School plans.
   5. Lines 532 - 554: This is a very simple function that deals with clearing the data on an input table. Note that it immediately clears the choices from the table itself, and from localStorage, to prevent the issue of the old data popping up after a reload. Not much else to talk about here.
   6. Lines 556 - 698: This section of the code contains several functions that provide the logic and calculations needed for the results section of the page, arguably the most important part of the website. This is what the users have come here for, so it was critical to ensure that all functions worked consistently well. I use the tallyCredits function for the academic area graduation requirements details. For the last few bullet points of the credit summary, which deal with the other specifications (like Health, Catalyst, US History), I use the several functions I defined to check their presence within the user's selection.
   7. Lines 700 - 748: This function, AlertCoursePrereqs manages the prerequisites display, at the bottom of the results section. For every course that the user has inputted into the tables, it looks to find if the prerequisite has been taken. For any that lack the required prerequisites, a specific alert message is generated and shown on the display.
   8. Lines 750 - 802: The final function, overallCheck manages the last remaining section of the results tab we have yet to discuss: the Things to Change section. This section was intended as a synthesis of the credit summary, which is why I placed it right underneath it. If the user has not met any credit minimum requirements for graduation, a specific alert is generated and shown on this display. Next, if there are any courses, the prerequisites of which have not been met, an alert is also generated imploring users to check the necessary prerequisites and to add them to their course plans. Of course, I know that people can and do take skip tests, get exemptions, or take different pathways, and so this is why I wrote the little asterisk at the bottom of the prerequisites display (which you can see in the HTML file).

Limitations and Next Steps: 
Although this system checks for many of the requirements and specifications of our school's academic system, there are still improvements that can be made, and more features that can be added:
 - adding support for courses that have two different prerequisite options (like how AP Calc BC can be taken after either Precalc/Parametrics or Accel 2)\
 - adding support for course that have MULTIPLE prerequisites that all need to be satisfied (like how AP Physics C needs both a previous Physics course and enrollment in AP Calc)
 - dealing with concurrent enrollment (like how AP Calc can either be before or concurrently for AP Physics C)

Instead of having to manually count through a convoluted Google Sheet or a physical piece of paper, with a press of a button, a student can see where they need to make changes for a successful academic plan. During a particularly stressful time for many students, this code lifts the pressure and makes their lives easier, helping the SAS community.
